Now, the first series of questions really involve
your academic training and your direction
towards oceanography, or what directed you
towards oceanography. So would you begin there,
please? OK.
My first background in oceanography came from a
background in geophysics where I was at the
California Institute of Technology from 1948 to
1952 as an undergraduate. I started out in physics
and then got interested in field work,
geophysics, got into geology and geophysics
there. Completed a Bachelor of Science program in
1952. And about the same time, I started hearing
about the oceans in different ways. I think like
most everybody hears about the oceans nowadays
too. And heard also about the Scripps Institution
of Oceanography, which wasn't very far from where
I lived. So the summer of, or the spring of 1952,
shortly before I was graduating, I went down to
talk with a few people down there. I was given a
couple of people's names. I didn't know anybody
down there to talk with and get introduced to what
oceanography was all about, particularly in the
geophysical side. And I think I spoke initially
down there with Roger Revell, who kind of
nonplussed me with the question, well, what do you
want to do? And I said, well, I'm not sure. What is
there to do in oceanography? And during a very busy
meeting, a scientific meeting down there, which I
think was going on with the Institute of
Geophysics, I heard some interesting talks, and
then Ravel was kind enough to give me an hour or so of
his time after the meeting and asked me this
question and listened to my background and hear
what I wanted to do in oceanography. And after
that, he steered me over to Russell Raitt, who was a
geophysicist there working in seismic
refraction. And I talked with Russ for a while, and
he offered me a job for the summer down at Scripps.
So I took it. summer job, went down for the summer
and got involved with some of the instrumentation
problems of doing seismic work at sea. And got a
couple of short cruises under my belt that summer
with the so-called bottle snatchers, the
physical oceanographers who were making
hydrographic casts offshore near California,
and learned what going to sea was like on a small
ship. at least in the summer outside of
California.
The summer went very fast. And as it turned out, the
seismic work I was doing and the instrumentation I
was working on with Dr. Raid was being developed
for a cruise that was being started in the fall to go
to the South Pacific, one of the first major
cruises of Scripps designated Capricorn. And
near the end of the summer, Russ asked me whether I
might be interested to go on this cruise, which was
four months long, October to February, something
like that. And I thought it over, because during
the meanwhile, I had began thinking seriously
about getting into graduate school at Scripps for
the fall and had applied and was ready to do that.
And Russ suggested I might as well go on this cruise
because that was part of any oceanographer's
training program anyway, and that'd be just like
going to graduate school. So I agreed. And that was
sort of my launching point for major
oceanography.
I could get into some of the details of that cruise.
Right, right. What were your impressions as sort
of a first-timer on an oceanographic cruise?
Well, I was kind of fascinated by everything, and
everything was new, and it, you know, I'd never
been out on any major cruise at all in my life, and I
was, I guess, you know, having some of the same
feelings that maybe a person like Christopher
Columbus had about going out to sea. You know,
what's on the other side of the shelf edge out
there? And the first leg of the cruise was from San
Diego out to the, I think, Inuit Tower. In fact, the
ship was participating in some of those initial
atom bomb tests at that time, 1952. And they were
physical oceanographers and chemists were
taking samples and doing some studies of the
islands out there. And Professor Ray was not on the
first leg, but I remember the first leg was being
headed up by Arthur Maxwell. who was a graduate
student at Scripps at that time, and was my first
contact with the people actually doing work at
Scripps. And Art was then doing the heat flow work
at Scripps. I wasn't involved at all. And he did
that as his thesis program. One of the, some of the
first heat flow measurements ever made at sea,
which originally got started that same summer
with Sir Edward Bullard. We've probably talked
about this already. So those were kind of exciting
days of new instrumentation, new things going on
in oceanography, all coming along very suddenly.
And I was just getting into it myself. So I felt part
of that excitement, I think, during the work. We
were going to do new things at sea. Seismic
refraction hadn't been done very much. And I was
participating in that particular program as
essentially a technician to help out on that
program. At the same time, we were going out to
these coral islands. I'd never seen coral islands
diving, and I was interested in diving and
underwater exploration and things of this sort.
So there was a whole diving program on board, for
example, to look at coral reefs. I wasn't a
professional diver myself, but I participated in
a little bit of that, skin diving and snorkeling,
which was part of the attraction to me at that time
for oceanography. It still is to some extent. So we
spent some time out at the islands there and then
had a pretty long cruise, four months long, which
took us down through the South Pacific Islands,
the beautiful weather, kind of South Pacific
cruise thing. But spending most of our time at sea,
of course, doing these major seismic progression
experiments. I think we did more refraction work
that cruise that had ever been done before
anywhere. a large number of stations, which I
can't remember. And particularly, I remember the
people on board who were some of the pioneers in
oceanography. Roger Revelle joined us out after
the first transit out. He wasn't with us on the
first flight. He joined us in a week talk in a
bikini, and then was with us for the rest of the
cruise, which lasted about three and a half
months. And Russ Ray.
And Walter Monk was with us. And Martin Johnson,
who was one of the first, well, he was co-author of
the book, The Oceans. And he was doing a lot of
plankton sampling. And Walter Monk was kind of
doing everything, like he always does. And I think
he was sort of in between some research programs of
his own and wanted to go on this cruise, which was
really an exciting event. Oh, and we had Willard
Baskin, Bill Baskin, along with us, who is kind of
an engineering entrepreneur at sea. I don't know
whether you've talked with him. No. He'd be a
fascinating person to talk to, too, if you can. He
has a whole story of his own, which is fascinating,
but I think I should let him tell it. Is he here at
Wato? No, he's now in a private firm out in Long
Beach, California. I think he works for the state
now, the State Department of Water Resources or
something like that in California. But he still
keeps contacts with oceanography. We have a ship
here now that was designed by him. We just got the
Alcoa Sea Probe, which is an aluminum vessel built
for either recovering large objects from the
bottom of the ocean, it's got a big derrick on it, or
drilling. And we're about to use it, try to use it,
in a research capacity. But we'll see how that goes
in the next year. Anyway, that was sort of my
introduction to oceanography. I wasn't involved
Arch Maxwell, his measurements, but I was very
busy with the marine refraction program and was
intending to get more involved with that after the
cruise in terms of working up data, interpreting
data. But as it turned out, I got drafted right
after the cruise, spent a couple of years in the
Army, and
took a little sidetrack at that point, instead of
coming directly back into oceanography. It was
clear at Scripps that I think, and something I
still tell students, is that we really need to, a
person who's serious about oceanography
probably doesn't want to major in oceanography as
an undergraduate. Much better to have a basic
science background, physics, math, chemistry,
engineering, biology. and then get into a
specialty of oceanography, because then you can
bring this major field into the field of
oceanography and have a much better basic
background than you would if you had an
oceanographic undergraduate degree. So I
decided I needed a little more background in math
and physics, so I went up here to Harvard for a year
and a half. to essentially take more courses in
math and physics, sort of get myself brushed up on
things after spending a couple of years in the
Army. Yes, enlisted then. I didn't get sent
overseas during the Army, but I was stationed in
Maryland in the Chemical Corps. So it wasn't all
bad. I was very eager to get back into research
again. So I studied for a while under Francis Birch
up here at Harvard, who's a geophysicist, solid
earth geophysicist. Not much, he's not very much
involved with oceanography, but I took a lot of
courses both under him and under other people at
Harvard and took a master's degree in Harvard in
geophysical sciences. Then I went back to Scripps
in 1956, I think. Yeah, 1956. And started a formal
graduate program there. And went through the
general courses there. And after a year, I thought
I might get back into the marine refraction work.
But it was clear that there was a lot of interest in
diplo measurements. And see, after Art Maxwell
had done his measurements and interpreted them,
And they turned out to be so unusual. And people
thought that should be encouraged. And I was
encouraged to get involved with the heat flow work
and see by Russ Raid and others, Roger Abell and
others in Scripps at that time. So I kind of
gathered all the equipment that had been left at
Scripps. Art Maxwell had since left Scripps and
gone to the ONR, Office of Naval Research, in
Washington, DC. He'd finished all his field work.
Hadn't quite finished writing up his thesis, but
he was doing that in Washington. He wanted
somebody to continue that field program. So I got
involved with that and started getting ready for
another major cruise that I went on for another
four months. Those were the days when graduate
students really went to sea, as they still do in
many institutions, but usually not for so long.
We're a little bit spoiled nowadays. Well,
conditions are different. We don't have the same
emphasis on data gathering as we did at that time.
So I went to sea for four months on the downwind
expedition, which was headed by Bill Menard at
Scripps, and was essentially a geological,
geophysical expedition in 1956. Is the tape
running? Oh yeah, we're still doing it. Let's see,
it was 56, 57. That was the international
geophysical year, which was, got some momentum
from many quarters. The United States was a big
participant. So oceanography had been enjoying a
large increase of funding at that time. We could
support some fairly large expeditions. And
fortunately, I was given some funding and support
to get this instrumentation together with the
support of other people at Scripps. and went on
this cruise where I managed to, we managed to get
quite a few workflow measurements at sea, which
formed the basis of my eventual graduate work at
Scripps. And after I got back from that
expedition, I was able to start working on the
interpretation of the measurements. It turned
out that the distribution of measurements was
such that we were concentrating on this major
geological feature called the East Pacific Rise
in the South Pacific. Not much was known about
that. It turned out to have very high heat flow and
was one of these enigmas before we understood
anything about plate tectonics. Why was that heat
flow so high on the East Pacific Rise? and we mapped
it in several places, able to run profiles, and got
a general picture of high and low heat flow
associated with these major tectonic features on
the Earth. And so I wrote that up in the thesis
during the next few years, meanwhile
participating in a few other expeditions. I was, I
guess, I was a field-oriented type person with
instrumentation. That was needed at that time a
lot because we had so few measurements to see. I
guess heat flow was also one of the first
instrumentation systems to work in the deep sea,
electronically. I think that's true. When Art
Maxwell and Sir Edward Bullard started it, I think
it was the first deep sea electronic instrument to
work reliably in the deep sea. I don't know. There
may have been some current meters and things like
that. But electronics just hadn't been developed
at all. Before, we were using vacuum tubes in the
instrument, big pressure case, and big
instrument, recording on chart paper inside the
instrument. And it was all very bulky and
cumbersome.
And it's amazing what electronics has done for us
in the ensuing 15 or 20 years. Just fantastic. Been
a tremendous fallout from the space program for
oceanography in many ways.
But that was the job I had to get myself involved
with all phases of the research. Putting the
hardware together, making the instrument work,
interpreting the measurements. So you had to be a
jack of all trades in those days. That's kind of
what made you successful. You could do all things
reasonably well and get a thesis out at the same
time. One of the problems then with oceanography
was that students tended to spend a long time
getting a degree. They essentially were getting
into oceanography as a research person, as a
worker. And they worked for a major research
professor that was involved in some field. But it
wasn't a push to get through your degree at that
time. And I could see during the time I was going
through the program that I felt some push to get
through, perhaps because I was a little older and
had gotten in the Army and things of this sort. And I
said, well, I better get this over with and get it
over. I was essentially through in three years,
although I didn't get my thesis written up until
the fourth year. That was unusual at Scripps. It
usually took five or six years to get through a
graduate program. Scripps was kind of a funny
entity at that time, because it was sort of a
research institute separate from the rest of the
university. We were actually part of the
University of California in Los Angeles,
although we were 200 miles from Los Angeles. There
was no UCSD at that time. And so I got my degree from
UCLA officially, even though I was down in Scripps
all the time. And I had professors on my committee
who were at UCLA, geophysicists, not
oceanographers, but people who were worried
about the solid earth. And I was worried about the
solid earth underneath the oceans. And so they
helped stimulate the whole atmosphere of new
ocean exploration. No one knew anything about the
oceans at that time, essentially. Nothing about
sea floor spreading, nothing about plate
tectonics. And I think the heat flow measurements
were partially instrumental in developing these
new ideas, along with the geomagnetism and other
things that you'll probably hear from Jim
Hertzberg about and others.
Well, you were saying not much had been done with
heat flow then and that primarily that you had
thought the instrumentation had developed,
excuse me, to the point where it made all of this
possible. Yeah. Yeah, I think that was sort of the
point where We were benefiting a lot from things
like the space program in terms of instruments.
And we were learning how to do things with
instruments in the DC much better than we had
before. And I guess I felt, getting into the
instrumentation myself, that we had a fairly
reliable set of instruments to go to sea. And so we
started to develop this program of getting a lot
more measurements at sea on several expeditions.
I was on three or four, one to the Gulf of
California,
off California, North Pacific, And I can't
remember all the cruises. There were just several
that I was participating in at the time I was a
graduate student. And so finally I got my PhD.
1960, I think it was. Of course, it was very
important to get your reputation established, as
it is in all fields of science, by publishing. So I
had gotten out a couple of papers at that time, too,
just about the same time I was getting through my
PhD and continuing the work at sea. So I stayed in
that for a few more years at Scripps as a research
scientist. I was on the staff for three or four
years and felt that that was very beneficial for me
at the time, because I could take advantage of the
instrumentation and setup, the organizational
setup that I was familiar with at Scripps for a few
years, to get a lot of work done to see, to get a lot of
papers published, which I did. So that kind of
caught me up with things, and I suppose sort of gave
me a reputation in the field at that time. that
still stays with me, even though I may not be as
active now as I once was in that particular field,
personally.
But about that time, I guess I was feeling a little
bit of the need to diversify my own interests and
test my own fields of interest and what I really
wanted to do for the rest of my life. So I took an
opportunity to go do something entirely
different. Not entirely different, but quite
different from what I'd been doing. In 1964, I took
a job in UNESCO in Paris. Okay, one second. Now,
we've got a blank that's occurring between 60 and
64. Okay. Now, obviously, you were doing
something between 60 and 64 besides writing
papers. Where were you then? Right. Well, I was at
Scripps. This is the period when I was, after my
PhD, when I was on the staff at Scripps. That's what
I thought. And was heavily involved with the heat
flow work. Okay. This is when I went to see a lot. And
who was working in heat flow with you between 60 and
64? Well, I... I was essentially the principal
researcher experience at that time. At the same
time, other institutions were getting involved
more heavily, like Lamont and Woods Hole with
other people. John Reitzel was here at Woods Hole.
I don't know whether you know him. No, I don't know
him. He was involved with people over several
years. He's not in the field anymore. And then Mark
Langseth at LeMond, who you may interview. Well, I
haven't been to LeMond yet, but I will. He's about
the same vintage as I am, and started getting
involved. Well, Maurice Ewing was an inventor of
another type of instrumentation, similar, at
LeMond. And Mark Langseth was heavily involved in
that, and I still have a lot of contact with him at
LeMond. about the same vintage as I was. They were
sort of doing an independent program over in the
Atlantic. It was the same kind of things. I think we
kind of had to jump on them at Scripps because Sir
Edward Bullard had gotten the thing started in
1952 with Art Maxwell. So we had a lot more
measurements in the Pacific than we did in the
Atlantic in the early 1960s. And at the same time,
the new geological ideas were coming along right
then about the nature of these mid-ocean ridges
and what they represented. We didn't really have
seafloor spreading back then. So we were
essentially kind of making measurements all over
the place to understand the distribution of heat
flow in conjunction with the geological features
of the seafloor. The big aseismic ridges, such as
the Cocos and Tehuantepec Ridge, Gulf of
California, which turned out to have high heat
flow. And Lennard, about the time, was very active
in interpreting the East Pacific rise and how it
represented a major mountain forming feature,
which was going right up the East Pacific rise,
coming from the South Pacific up into the Gulf of
California, and then right up into the western
part of the United States. And the idea was that
there were big convection currents going on down
under under the crust of the earth, and that these
convection currents were bringing heat up, which
we could measure heat loss through the surface.
And then this also, I think, our ocean work
stimulated a lot more work on land at the same time.
I started to get involved with a land program,
also, of heat flow measurements and scripts.
because Victor Bakke, who you may have talked to in
the scripts, came there about that time, early
1960s, and brought his expertise, geophysical
expertise, of doing work on land, and he and I
started the program of making heat flow
measurements on land. I did never finish that. I
left Scripps before that time. It was carried on by
John Slater and Bob Warren and Vic Bakke.
Eventually published the work on land, showing
the high heat flow continuation of the Gulf of
California up into the western United States. But
my work between 1960 and 64 was essentially a
continuation of the work I'd done there as a
graduate student. making heat flow
measurements, tying it in with other seismic
refraction work, other geophysical
measurements, geological measurements, and see
to understand these major geological features.
Now, were you teaching classes at Scripps then,
too? I wasn't teaching much. This was one of the
other things that kind of made me leave Scripps, I
think, eventually, because there was this big
dichotomy, I felt and still feel, existed at
Scripps between the research staff, which I was a
part of, and the... and the academic sides of
things, the teaching staff, and still existed
scripts. We don't have that here at Woods Hole, at
least right at the present time. I hope we don't get
that, because it tends to divide people a little
bit. And I felt, although I had a lot of freedom in my
shirts, that I didn't have much to say about the way
the university is run or the teaching of students
or anything like that. I did help give lectures in
some courses. I was invited to do that and talked
about it before. Bill Menard taught a course. I
think Russ Raitt and others were teaching courses
at that time. But I was still fairly specialized at
the time. And I felt I needed some broadening of my
own background. So I took an entirely different
tack at that time and went over to UNESCO in Paris in
1964, sort of at the urging of Roger Revelle and my
other mentors at Scripps that there might be an
interesting thing to do. Sounds like a nice
background. Well, that's probably the
fluorescent lights, but that's okay. It's one of
these things. Before we leave Scripps and you go to
UNESCO, I want you to make some comments about
Scripps. What was Roger Revelle like? Roger was a
very exciting person. He was director at Scripps
at that time, and had been for a number of years. He
had the ability to give you an excitement of the
field of oceanography that nobody else, or very
few others, were able to do at the time, I think.
Walter Monk could do that to some extent. And Russ
Ray, too, in his particular field of seismic
refraction. Russ, well, what I learned from Russ
Ray, I'll just sort of ramble, and then we'll go on
through this, is the real appreciation of good
measurements of C. Russ was kind of a
perfectionist, and I think still is. He wanted
good measurements and unambiguous data that he
didn't want to be wishy-washy about the
interpretation of. So I think he more than anybody
else gave me an appreciation for the good quality
measurements at sea. And Walter Monk, I didn't
know as well, because he was more involved with
physical oceanography problems at the time than
he was in geophysics. And so I wasn't too close to
him, although we were on the same floor at the same
time. He was more in oceanographic problems. But I
could see that Walter was thinking a lot about the
quantitative aspects and theoretical aspects of
oceanography and geophysics. And I always had a
feeling, a little bit, of being in awe of Walter
when I talked to him, because he clearly had a much
deeper theoretical background than I did and
understood a lot about geophysics. I think
Walter, I don't know whether you interviewed him.
Yes, I did. was attracted into the field also by
Roger Revelle to some extent. They both came to
Scripps. About the same time. Temporaneously, I
think. Actually, Sverdrup was probably the
person that attracted them. Revelle maintains
Walter Monk came there to meet a young lady. That's
his explanation. That could be. That could be. I
don't remember that history, because that was
before I arrived on the scene. And I didn't know
Sverdrup either. But I know they both benefited
under his guidance. Roger was the kind of a person
who was very broad, and he understood many aspects
of oceanography, and was always encouraging
students to get involved and exciting them about
the aspects of oceanography, wherever their
interests might lie. And I think his contribution
to my education
was partly through his own research, which was in
heat flow with Art Maxwell initially. He wrote a
lot of papers about the implications of these
unusually high measurements of heat flow in the
oceans. And I benefited from those in my initial
stages. But he also contributed by directing me
and channeling me into the areas that he thought
were fruitful, were going to pay off in the next few
years, like heat flow or seismic refraction. And
so I'm very grateful for that, because I didn't
know anything about oceanography at the time, and
was able to follow that channel very, very good at
that particular time. So I considered Roger as a
major contributor to the direction I took in my own
research. Besides being a very personable
friend, he had me over at his house and introduced
me to his family.
It was kind of a big family at Scripps at that time.